Two French senators who have come to visit New Zealand.
Um, we will hand over to you for introductions in a moment.
Uh, but I'd also like to acknowledge your ambassador
to New Zealand who's joining us today as well.
Wonderful to see you all here.
We have members of the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee from across the political spectrum,
government members and opposition members.
And we are very much looking forward
to a discussion with you today.
We have 30 minutes set down for that,
and I'd like to hand over to you
for some introductory comments,
Minutes If you wish.
You can come to the, the side
and have the microphone permanently.
Microphone.
Uh, thanks. Uh, new president, dear team.
And ladies and gentlemen, aps, um,
it is a very great pleasure for us to be here.
Uh, as far as I'm concerned, I'm a member
of the Foreign Affairs and Defense
Committee at the French Senate.
I am also a member of the NATO Parliamentary, uh, assembly
as, as well as the chairman
of the French New Zealand Friendship Group at the French
Senate and the Chairman of the Rugby Club.
Thank you, Mr. President. My name is Sebastian Pla.
I'm a senator and I'm also a member
of the Senate's Economic Affair Committee, as well
as the chairman of the, uh, parliamentary rugby team.
Excellent. And e product one e Predict one
of the best wine of South of
France. Nice.
Congratulations. Well, well thank you very much
for taking the time to come all the way down to New Zealand
to visit us and to support the French rugby team.
Condolences. But, uh, we are happy with the outcome
and we will wish you luck as well for this Friday.
Uh, sorry, this Saturday night, it not quite as much luck
as, but, uh,
but I think sports speaks to the depth
of the relationship in sport typically is a great way to
transcend challenges that any countries may face.
And not that New Zealand and France have many challenges,
and indeed we have enjoyed a longstanding relationship
and are celebrating our 80 years of diplomatic relations.
And I think that is an incredible achievement.
So it is a pleasure to be able to engage face to face
with you here in this setting.
What, what is to me very important is
what I would call the parliamentary diplomacy.
That is disability talk in a responsible
and open way by every possible subject,
Economic.
I would like to apologize for the absence
of ideal colleague
and friend George Nael, who's the, uh, senator
for New Caledonia.
He was supposed to be here today, unfortunately.
He was, he had to stay behind in Paris
because there was a big, uh, conference series of talks
between the various economic, political
and social stakeholders of New Caledonia, which led
to the signing of an agreement which will be very fruitful
for the future of, uh, new Caledonia,
which will become a new caledonian state within the,
uh, French nation.
We are, this friendship group has 50 members.
Uh, this is a New Zealand
and France friendship group at the Senate.
And, uh, in terms of distance, if you look at the distance
and the population, we certainly are one
of the most important, uh, senate group.
And this shows how Thank you.
This shows how much, uh, our colleagues, uh,
care about New Zealand
and about this specific special relationship
because even though we are so far apart,
we are also very close because of the, uh, proximity
between the Caledonia and New Zealand.
So we have a wide range of issues we'd like to talk with,
with you, but I'm not gonna do well on the rugby side
of thing, even though I played with some
of you back in the days.
But I will just say that I hope,
and I think that Hamilton is not well, is not Wellington.
Um,
We are living in an increasingly
unstable and dangerous world.
And we are particularly appreciative of New Zealand's stand
outside supporting Ukraine from day one,
Dan.
And this reminds us of the sacrifice
of all these young New Zealanders who went over to Europe
during World War I and World War iii, fight by our side for,
uh, values such as freedom, democracy, peace,
and, uh, world security.
And
What's at stake in the Ukraine is not only the fight
for independence
and freedom of this particular country,
it's also a fight over value.
And to know whether in the future force will, uh,
prevail over.
So this is about the heritage of this war.
What happened after World War II two
materialism is something that we hold very dear,
and we know that you, uh, appreciate that as well.
And what's at stake here is not only what Russia is going
to do with Ukraine, but also, uh,
China's intentions in the Pacific as well as the
American foreign policy.
Mm-hmm.
We, uh, France has always been in favor for stronger
European defense system.
And fact has proven as right,
because we know that we need
to increase expenditures in defense.
'cause we can't rely forever on the
American defense umbrella.
That's why we need to develop stronger bonds between France,
the EU, and Pacific Nation.
And that includes obviously New Zealand
and not only in the economic, uh, sphere, we just had a chat
with your minister
and we discussed the issue of the free trade agreement, uh,
which we fully support,
but also on the issue of defense cooperation.
Uh,
We have decided to increase by 5%, uh, the, uh, percentage
of our budget, uh, of our DDP, sorry, uh, for, uh,
defense expenditure by 2035.
And that will require a lot of efforts.
Mm-hmm.
We were not willing to spend billions out of pleasure,
but we know that the safety of France, the eu,
and the Democratic world will rely fully on, uh, the fight
for our values and our principles.
We have chosen to, uh, increase our efforts in
or widen our, um, industrial
and techn technological defense base, uh, so that, uh,
French arm makers can increase our independence.
We can, and you can be able
to use our weapons in an independent way.
This is very important case when I go to the, uh,
NATO parliamentary assembly
and have a chat with my, uh, Danish colleague
who counterparts, uh, when discuss the issue of defense in
so so of Greenland.
They know that, that they will be in a position
where they will be able to fully use the weapons
that they have purchased from the Americans.
Not the,
An increasing number of Eastern countries have come to us
and said that we know a good all our basket
and we're going to diversify our sources, uh,
when purchasing weapons.
Can I ask, sorry, is that in relation specifically
to the United States
or is there an intent for France alone
to skew more on their own internal military production?
Uh, asked that in the context of
what we see in Europe at the moment, French,
the Germans, the Dutch, they all,
and others all produce separate types of military equipment,
which can make it difficult
to integrate keep from a perspective.
Is there an intent to try
and integrate some of that whilst having some independence
with your own manufacturing?
At the moment, all the weapons
that we produce comply with NATO standards.
So they are fully inter correct
The exterior.
So The issue here is about sovereignty
of absolute sovereignty, especially when it comes to, uh,
nuclear deterrence power.
But we also want to be able to offer French weapons
that are either produced in France,
fully produced in France, or producing corporation
with other countries.
I'm thinking about M-E-P-C-D-A, for instance,
which is a Missi producer that's a fully European.
And what we want
to avoid is dependent from
other providers such as the states.
Just A question around, um, uh,
and I hear what you're saying in terms of, uh, trying
to get more independence from, from the United States
and, uh, we have those issues
playing out here in the Pacific.
So I was wondering, uh, do you have a, have a sense of
what your intentions would be in, in our region?
Um, and given we've all been watching with interest
with what's happening over in the California.
So what we believe is that it is an interest negotiate
and to, uh, increase, uh, our, uh, regional corporation
and what France is doing.
And that we have developed, uh, in the Pacific strategy
with two, uh, linchpins, which would be the reunion
for the Indian Ocean and, uh, new Caledonia for the Pacific.
And just to, just to follow up on,
on earlier comments you made about, um, new Caledonia.
And I know that there's, there's been that development,
I was wondering about the, um, about how the inclusion
of the indigenous voice of the
Kki people have been included in terms of
what's playing out there moment
Cor
system, national, national
say the security
responsibility.
So that's an interesting
thing, interesting thing you're saying.
Uh, last week the agreement was signed in Paris, uh, in,
with all the political parties, uh,
presence both from the independent side as well
as from the loyalist side.
And they came up with a very original form of solution
with two citizenship, the French one
and New CalEd one, which would be made available
to the inhabitants of New Caledonia.
And, uh, all the decision regarding the future
of New Caledonia will be taken in New Caledonia
by the new Caledonia government,
except on three specific areas, which is defense, security,
and justice, which will still be, uh,
where the decision will be made in Paris,
the riot and the events of last year, it was very important
that an agreement be found and not imposed from Paris,
but that it be, uh, decided by the new Canadian forces.
Uh, and so they could be implemented for them, by them
Popul.
Now, um, there are still some issues
that need to be solved.
For instance, we will have to get this agreement ratified
by the population through a referendum.
And we certainly will keep on working so
that we actually come to that point.
Responsible economy, particular,
I may say a word about the economy.
Uh, yesterday, thanks to the uh, French ambassador,
we were lucky enough to meet with the one
of the ma the leaders of the MA economy in New Zealand.
And we particularly appreciated the MO model
that was presented to us.
And next week, my colleague and I are going to New Caledonia
and we hope to present this, uh, model
to the canna population.
'cause that could be a great starting point
to create proper canna economy.
And what my colleague just said was very important
because, uh, the future, future of new Caledon Caledonia,
sorry, it will be, uh, will be depending on the ability
to restart the local economy.
And if should new Edia fall into chaos,
this would be a terrible thing.
Not only for New Caledonia, not only for France,
but for all the, uh, neighboring countries.
So to go back to this issue of defense
and uh, security, it will be quite interesting for us
to develop this cooperation to have a closer
regional cooperation between France and New Zealand.
Maybe through, um, uh, defense drills
or assuring inter interoperability of our weapons,
maybe a protection scheme.
'cause if find sickly,
you don't have any fighter jets in
New Zealand, for instance.
Uh, we could also discuss only on the
Rugby Field, sorry, only on the rugby field.
Uh, we could, uh, discuss, uh, the idea
of a collective security pact, uh,
for the entire South Pacific area with, uh, issues such
as civil defense.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in case of a natural disaster,
how we could bring solutions
and help to smaller island nations.
Yeah, look, that's a very good point
and we are very aware of the evolving
security challenges globally as well.
And on the basis of that,
we have put out a new defense capability plan earlier this
year, which will double our investment in defense.
Uh, we have a strong leadership role to play in the Pacific.
We're a small country globally,
but a large player in the Pacific.
So defense is an important part of that.
Not just the military aspect,
but of course the humanitarian assistance
components as well.
And because of our small size though, we need to work in
with other countries.
Australia, of course, uh, ally,
but other partners as well in the region
present good opportunity for us
to deliver integrated solutions.
What is actually the share of your GDP allocated
to defense and do you have any plan to
Increase that? Yes.
Yeah, so we have been about 1%
and we are doubling that.
So we will be looking to 2%
and this is the bare minimum for us.
Uh, may well exceed that,
but we have I think, still decisions to make in that regard.
We've not been asked to go to 5%.
That's true. An area of, of focus for us though, is
around more advanced technologies.
We are small, we will never compete with
frigates on the water aircraft in the sky,
but we can do some new advanced technology very well.
We already have, we already have some great capability,
particularly in the space program.
We are the fourth in terms of global space launches,
USA, China, Russia, New Zealand.
And that's something we're very proud of as a small nation.
So we can do well in niche capabilities
and that should be our focus
Visited Christ.
We can actually testify to what you just said,
because a couple of days ago in Christchurch, we went
to see this company that, uh, manufactures high altitude,
solar powered drones.
And we're ex extremely impressed with what we saw
by the project that they are implementing.
And as soon as we return to Paris, we will meet with the,
uh, French, uh, defense minister
and suggest to him that we could develop a corporation
between France and this particular company.
Uh, because as you may know, France has the largest
exclusive economic area, Maritimes, uh, area.
It's the first in the world and it's quite hard
to use satellites to monitor
the entire coastline and the sea.
And this could be a possibility for us to, uh,
use this New Zealand, uh, design solution to,
uh, replace what satellites would normally do.
I'm very conscious of time.
Uh, we're just about at the end of our time.
We still have a few minutes. There may be a couple
of quick questions from other colleagues.
Happy to. Yep.
Uh, the requirement to move to 5%
of GDP for military spend, do you think
that will lead to greater stability over time
or whether it will still require
some strong discipline around nato?
See,
Uh, this is, sorry, this is actually a necessity.
I mean, this figure I mentioned of, uh, 5% this was,
will be achieved progressively.
The initial target is 3.5% by 2035,
which is requires a huge fiscal effort on our part.
President Macon recently, uh,
discussed the defense program Programming Planning Act,
which has a target by 2 20 30,
and he brought it forward to 2027, which means that the 1.5%
that we were supposed to spend by then,
that's about 5 billion, uh, in total, uh,
which should be spent by 2027.
Uh, this is something we need to do.
We need to prepare ourselves because, um, for the Ukraine,
we don't know what's going to happen in the Ukraine.
I have been there three times between 2023 and 2024,
and I saw in my own eyes
how much has changed over the course
of this couple of years.
Uh, there's an increasing number of drones
that are, uh, at work.
And the Ukrainian popular people is highly motivated, yet
they are willing to, to fight for our, for the country
and for the values that we share with them.
But at the same time, they're struggling
because the weapons are not coming,
coming late, coming too slow.
That's a big problem for them.
Are you in Ukraine? But close the front
line, close back mode.
It was, uh, one night at three kilometers from, uh, backout.
And, uh, and he, it was, uh, uh, something interesting to,
to understand and to know what's happened in the close,
the front line, um,
domain.
What we fear is that Putin might never stop.
Uh, let's imagine we never reach a, a peace agreement
and the situation is frozen.
Well, we don't know whether Putin, we fear
that Putin might start to attack, uh, the Baltic states,
Poland or Romania.
Uh, but that would be a completely different situation.
'cause all three countries or all countries are part of NATO
and the eu, and therefore we would've
to intervene and defend them.
Uh, the,
because of the solidarity, uh, pact that is, uh, inherent
to nato, that's article five of nato.
But as well in the EU with, uh, article 42.7
of the eu, we have to defend them.
Revolution.
This definitely the issue,
which is why we need to prepare for it.
Uh, the new German chancellor, Fred, me, uh,
now understands the importance of it,
that we have become more aware of, uh, the need
to avoid an aggression from the the Vladimir Putin.
And to do so, we need to be able to deter it.
And deterrence requires specific means.
So what's at stake here is a European defense policy,
which is actually a revolution
because five years ago, no one in EU wanted a defense.
It was EU would say it's up to the states
to organize their own defense.
So this is a major evolution
that we've seen over the last five years.
And one last word, uh, I want to say that in France,
when it comes to defense at the moment, we have a consensus.
'cause apart from the far right
and the far left, all the political forces in the country
are willing to work together towards a common goal,
which is the developing, uh, defense force, uh, in, um,
yeah, in order to develop, uh, France, uh,
defense capacities.
Well, thank you very much and I would happily talk all day
on issues and on many other issues,
but I know we are all busy, so we will have
to alize up there.
That was interesting. But I do just want to say that
we have a lot of shared values
and it's easy to have values when they
are not under pressure.
It's much harder to maintain those
values when they are tested.
And that is exactly what is happening now.
And so it is vital that countries like New Zealand
and France that share these values must step up
and do everything that they can to uphold those ideals
that are so important for us globally.
So thank you very much again for taking the time to come
for meeting with our.